Heatwaves risk assessment for Australia using variants of the Cox model

Jason West, Bureau of Meteorology, Australia 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3271-3155

Abstract
We investigated the influence of key factors on the hazards associated with the occurrence of temporal clustering of heatwaves using variants of the Cox proportional hazards (PH) regression model. The use of survival analysis as a statistical framework to infer characteristics of probability distribution functions is a powerful method for modelling the complete distribution of climate variables rather than confining the analysis to simple statistical parameters like mean and variance. This approach allows for the assessment of the probability of extremes that are more informative than central tendency measures and constitutes the core of probabilistic risk assessments. Variants of the Cox model also naturally account for non-stationary patterns resulting from external influences such as climate change. We apply this concept to the onset of heatwaves to assess their full effect by location and time. We use observed maximum daily temperatures across 28 urban and rural areas in Australia for the period 1956–2022, along with monthly observations for the Oceanic Niño Index (ONI) sea surface temperature anomalies and the Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) sea surface temperature index as climate covariates to estimate the probability of heatwaves occurrence across the time after an initial time reference. We find that location status (urban/rural) and climate covariates derived from ONI and IOD are significant indicators of heatwave hazards, while epoch (pre-1980/post-1980) exhibited only a moderate difference. Despite the urban heat island effect, urban locations are less prone to extremes in heatwave frequency than rural locations. 

Significance Statement:
The hazard rate of heatwaves is marginally lower in urban areas relative to rural areas of similar latitude, altitude, and proximity to coast, holding the covariates of ENSO and IOD constant. The interaction between ENSO and IOD has a significant effect on the probability of exceedance time to event of heatwaves with incidence more than tripling when El Nino periods are coupled with neutral or positive IOD relative to neutral periods. Rural residents, particularly those vulnerable to the impacts of extended exposure to high temperatures, along with those who live long distances away from available health care are at highest risk. Managing exposures to extended heatwaves during the summer months in positive ENSO periods can be mitigated through increased accuracy of ENSO forecasts.
